---
title: 'Letter spirit: a model of creativity'
date: '2019-06-23'
summary: "I'm comparing the model of creativity put forward by Douglas Hofstadter and Gary McGraw in their paper on generating a font style with my design process."
draft: true
---

import {Certainty, Person} from '../../parts/CustomMDX'
export let h = {full: 'Douglas Hofstadter and Gary McGraw', short: 'Hofstadter and McGraw', pronouns: ['they', 'them','their','theirs']}

I'm very interested in exploring how metaphors structure our thinking. I recently got excited about this idea reading [_Metaphors We Live By_](). The early chapters of _Metaphors We Live By_ put forward a model of thinking that looks to me like it could clarify a bunch of language ambituities that I had kind of given up on clarifying. It looks at how we use metahpors drawn from our embodied experience to make sense of more abstract concepts.

An example: more is up. Look up the contradictory example which is shown to not be in conflict because both are drawn from different physical models.

I find writing very stressful. I try to make precise sentences and coherent use of metaphor. I often want to have perfectly balanced sentences, and I get so caught up in those that I lose the thread of my overall argument. I've tried to counter that by writing more concretely, and without trying to fit into a narrative, but I still get stressed. I know what good stuff looks like, and feel frustrated I'm not able to write it.

I also know I tend to get better feedback on the more complex stuff, and I respond to that feedback. This is true in design as well. I've been trying to go back to the fundamentals, what in programming are called primitives, and start from there. I think because I have seen in code how powerful those can be, and how you might have to trust that they'll prove their value, even if it makes for some intermediate awkwardness. So I've moved to a more ascetic, minimalist approach. I think this causes me to pass up some opportunities for fun, but I hope I'mon the right journey. I've been pleased with some of the results.

For writing, this process has been harder. Despite being an English major, I was too impatient to develop a really strong sense of grammar. Part of this is the influence of learning code on how I look at language. I'm getting older and worried whether I've chosen the right work path, but one thing is I'm more sure than ever that I can learn things (it's more the choosing what that is the issue). I had treated a discomfort with language as something I'd always have to live with while writing. After experiences in other domains it now feels like I could just learn more about it. It felt more approachable.

I did like that Steven Pinker quote about the weird linearity of language. (could I structure an entry around the metaphor example and the Pinker quote?)

Syntax things were interesting, but now I'm finidng out I may have been more interested in how thought was structured than in how language is (of course they're intertwined).

I wanted to do some code experiments with metaphor, to force concreteness. I was not so successful. Also, as a foster parent who now has lots of time to read while doing light park supervision duty, it's easier right now for me to read more than to do code experiments. So I decided to read further, and somehow I found my way back to Hofstadter. I've read part of GEB several times, but this time I thought I'd check out the papers. One of his focuses in analogy., which seems functionally the same as how metaphor is used in _Metaphors We Live By_. He talks even more about it as thought. This conceptually makes a lot of sense to me. Perhaps related to my day job where we look at machine learning and whether the models will understand language. I've been trying to simply describe why even though text-generation stuff is impressive I think it will be a long time before it can make senseibnle stories. A lack of concept seems the best explanation, especially because it doesn't have that embodied experience.

The concept of creativity. Maybe actually start here, explaining the letter example (the four modes and also certainty waves) then talking about it in context of web design. I could also relate it to design systems.

I should keep this aroundand do it separately as a draft for later.
